ASB

This was a service trip that focused on the gaps in early education for
socioeconomically disadvantaged communities in the Houston area. We met once a
week for several months before the trip itself, which took place over the Spring
Break, and discussed the multi-faceted challenges that these communities face in
their pursuit of education. During the trip, we volunteered at the Nabor House
Community which runs a non-profit preschool for disadvantaged children as well
as the Wesley Community Center which holds an after school program for early
elementary school children to provide a safe environment for them.

Every psychology and sociology class at university taught me about generalized
studies on the effects of a low socioeconomic status on the behavioral
development of a child, leading to poor academic performance as a teen, and then
ultimately impacting their adult life. Even though I knew that the generalized
results of a study cannot be accurately applied to the individual, I did not
have the context of a personal relationship with a child of this background to
really understand what this means.

Juan was a third grader in my group, which I was talking to about school. When I
asked for their favorite subject and why, he quickly said, "math because of the
patterns". I saw sincerity in his answer, so the next day I derived for him the
formula for the sum of an arithmetic series. Then I continued to give a quick
proof that the sum of all positive integers is -1/12, a result used in the
Casimir effect of quantum field theory. He was amazed and intrigued by what I
had just shown him, and wanted to learn more math. In that moment, I was struck
by the tragedy of their situation. All of the studies that I learned about in my
psychology and sociology courses and the weekly meetings leading to this trip,
all suggested that they were fighting an almost losing battle.

This experience gave me context in the talk about the economically
disadvantaged. All of a sudden, economic and educational policies became more
important to me. But so did immigration policy because in our group of students
there were some who were illegal immigrants. The program director talked to us
about the impact of immigration policies on these children's lives, how they
were painfully aware of what it meant to be an illegal alien. I realized my
privilege and also the need to help underserved communities.
