Prompt: Describe briefly any experiences and/or skills that have made you more
sensitive or appreciative of other cultures or the human condition.

Growing up in Houston, one of the most diverse cities in America, I had the
opportunity to explore many different cultures as well as develop a greater
understanding of the hardships many immigrants in America faced in their native
countries. My awareness began in my own home where both of my parents were
refugees of the Vietnam War. They told me about the struggles they faced growing
up in poverty and war time in Vietnam and then, once in America, struggling
financially to make their way. However, Houston is home to many different
ethnic communities and my education at Rice University allowed me to continue
exploring these cultures and the struggles that immigrants face.

In my senior year at Rice, I participated in a service trip that focused on the
gaps in early education for socioeconomically disadvantaged communities in the
Houston area. We discussed the multi-faceted challenges that children in these
communities face in their pursuit of education and later volunteered to help
teachers in two underserved areas in Houston. These areas comprised of many
people from Latin American countries who immigrated to America often
establishing large communities in cities such as Houston. The demographic we
were serving opened me to the problems that these quickly growing communities
face in America.

My deep realization of their struggle occurred after my experience talking to a
group of students about the importance of school and education. When I asked for
their favorite subject, a third grader named Juan enthusiastically said, "Math
because of the patterns". I sensed passion in his answer, so the next day I
derived for him the formula for the sum of an arithmetic series. Then I
continued to give a simplified proof that the sum of all positive integers is
-1/12, a peculiar result. He was enthralled by the math and wanted more. But he
did not have ready access to a computer or the internet and his parents worked
all day so he could not use the resources at the local library. In that moment,
I was struck by the tragedy of his situation-- all of his passion and interest
may be wasted because of his economic status.

This experience gave me context in the discussion about the socioeconomically
disadvantaged. Economic and educational policies became more personal to me, as
well as immigration policy because there were several students who were illegal
immigrants. It was heartbreaking to hear the community center director talk
about the impact of immigration policies on the children's lives; how they were
painfully aware of the consequences of being an illegal alien. The experience
humbled me and revealed how much of my privilege I had taken for granted. 

===

my psychology and sociology courses and the weekly meetings leading up to this
trip all suggested that he was fighting an almost losing battle in education.

Every psychology and sociology class at university taught me about generalized
studies on the effects of a low socioeconomic status on the behavioral
development of a child, leading to poor academic performance as a teen, and then
ultimately impacting their adult life. Even though I knew that the generalized
results of a study cannot be accurately applied to the individual, I did not
have the context of a personal relationship with a child of this background to
really understand what this means.
