For the majority of my life money has been tight in my family. Until the last
few years, I have been bothered by its ever present implications. However
throughout my years at university, I realized that although it has introduced
adversity into my life, that adversity has built my character in ways that no
other experience could. It has taught me several things; to work hard and fight
through setbacks and inconveniences, to take care of my health and therefore to
care for the health of others, and most importantly to appreciate the community
that has supported me and allowed me to walk the path that I otherwise could
not.

Many experiences in my life have demonstrated to me both my disadvantage and my
privilege. It was not until I worked with disadvantaged children in my last year
of university that I was able to lay my negative feelings about the
disadvantages I faced in my childhood to rest once and for all. In an exercise
with my peers, we were read scenarios corresponding to childhood advantage and
disadvantage from a list and took a certain amount of steps either forward or
backward. I landed second last. It was the first time I realized how
disadvantaged I was growing up with less than thirty books in my house, not all
of which were in English, or occasionally going 24 hours without eating a meal
and almost never a healthy one either. However, after working with the
disadvantaged children I also learned just how fortunate I was to have been
zoned into a good high school and to have supporting parents. Hard work and
persistence became more than just values to appreciate, they were my savior
allowing me to achieve and experience what I have in life even in the face of
inequity.

Despite the struggles I faced growing up, I realize that I owe my achievements
to the actions of both close friends, family, and generous strangers unknown. I
owe many home cooked dinners and rides home to the parents of my best friend.
Without them I would have had to walk home from school almost everyday and eat
fast food for dinner. I owe my best years at Rice University to the
philanthropic community that covered my tuition because my family and I were
unable to do so. I owe my first and only abroad experience in my life in
Switzerland to Shell whom gave me a scholarship to do research at the Large
Hadron Collider at CERN. With the support that I have received from society and
the community around me, I feel compelled to give back to it by helping the sick
and weak through medicine and research. I want to improve the health of our
society actively and immediately by my own hands, as well as revolutionize it
through discovery of new ideas to aid our fight against illness.



