I have a friend whose brother was murdered by a gunman in a university shooting.
I have a friend who lost his father in a motor accident a few hours after I
talked to him. I had a friend in high school I was just getting to know whose
own life was unexpectedly taken by undiagnosed hypertropic myopathy three months
before our graduation. Each death was sudden and unfair, but I guess at times
life is more bitter than sweet.

I do not know death, but I have seen it enough times to understand what it means
to live. After the death of my friend in high school, I reflected on those who
had passed away in my life. It was apparent to me that our lives are fragile;
that we can lose it at any second without warning. But I feared losing the
future the most. Each person was moving towards something greater; the brother
was getting a degree in computer engineering, the father was raising his son and
two daughters by himself, and the friend from high school was headed to
university on a football scholarship. I wondered what lives they would have had?
How many beautiful moments have their families been deprived of now that they
are gone? As I contemplated their deaths, my appreciation for people's lives
grew.

It was the combination of my sentiments about life and the actions of my uncle,
a physician, caring for my grandfather during his battle with Alzheimer's that
pushed me in the direction of medicine. My grandfather was diagnosed my first
year at university, but it had progressed for sometime beforehand. He soon began
to forget who I was even though he cared for me every summer during my childhood
while my parents worked. It was hard for everyone to see him slowly drift into
an alternate world of familiar faces on complete strangers. Eventually, when I
would visit, he smiled as if he knew me well but I could tell that he was
struggling to remember who I am. However, we were blessed with my uncle because
he knew how to take care of him especially towards the end when he contracted
pneumonia. Throughout my grandfather's battle, I could feel how much suffering
my uncle lifted off our shoulders as he answered our questions and gave us care
advice. Because of him, my grandfather could live his last few months primarily
at home I developed a personal understanding for the impact a great physician
can have on the life of the patient; on the many lives that surround the
patient. 

By my third year at university, I realized that while I enjoyed research in
particle physics the prospect of a career in pure physics research was not
enough for me. After considering my love for physics combined with witnessing
the role my uncle played in my grandfather's care and how much I had come to
value people's lives, I accepted a medical physics internship at MD Anderson
Cancer Center for the following summer.

Throughout my internship, I had the opportunity to observe the process of
providing radiation treatment. I was excited to see the very principles I
learned in my physics courses helping people effectively fight their cancer.
While the work I performed for the medical physicists was interesting, I
discovered the most enjoyable experience was seeing the patients when I observed
their treatments. However, there was not much patient interaction required from
the medical physicist, and I was eager to experience more in-depth interactions
as well. I requested to observe a radiation oncologist, and I quickly realized
medicine was the path for me. For each checkup, I could see the tension on the
faces of the patient and family. I could sense the worry behind their smiles and
laughter as the physician worked to put them at ease. Their fear reminded me of
the fear my family and I felt when my grandfather would have breathing
complications or would cough uncontrollably for hours. But the physician melted
their worries by answering questions, explaining the treatment process, or
giving care advice; just like my uncle had done for our family. Sometimes the
physician did not have good news to deliver but even in those moments he gave
the patient the power and assurance that he would be fighting alongside them. In
the months that I observed him, I had never experienced so much joy in my life
as I thought about the time that he gave back to patients who could now live
their lives pursuing a future. 

To me, being a physician is not just about healing sick patients; it is about
giving back their life to them and their family, their friends, and everyone who
cares for them. It is about getting to know my patients' dreams and wishes and
the life that they want after they get better because I want them to live it all
out. As a physician, I want to bring peace to terrified patients and families
just like my uncle and the physician I observed. I want them to know that I will
be fighting for them no matter how good or bad the prognosis. I may not be able
to save all of my patients because at times life is more bitter than sweet...
but at least I can get a say in the matter.
