I woke up to the morning sunlight shining in my eyes through the porthole
window. After a few seconds, the fogginess of sleep left my mind and the
constant whine of the jet engines flooded my ears. I took a peak out the window
and was blessed with a view of the Alps of Switzerland. It was my first time on
a plane and my first time out of the US. It was the summer after my sophomore
year, but this was not a vacation in Europe. I had come to Switzerland to work
at CERN for ten weeks where I would aid in the commissioning of the new
sub-detector for the Compact Muon Solenoid right before the Large Hadron
Collider was scheduled to resume operations. This was the opportunity of a
lifetime, one that would since never fail to draw a reaction out of whomever I
told.

Of course, I do not stand in the same position today as I did then. I am not
writing about a desire to pursue discoveries in high-energy particle physics,
but rather a desire to help those who are suffering from illness through the
practice of and the discovery in the field of medicine. My inspiration for
medicine can be traced back to my uncle, a physician himself. My relatives have
always come to him to ask for medical advice. Sometimes they asked minor
questions about medication usage or about more worrisome matters such as a
recurring physiological pain. He was always able to give them an answer and this
gave them peace of mind regardless of the nature of the answer, good or bad,
because they at least had an answer. It made an impression on me and I was quick
to play doctor and try to diagnose the medical problems of my family members as
well. I always had a feeling of satisfaction when I was able to give them an
answer, which usually consisted of telling them what it was not and not what it
was. But of course an eight year old typing using only two fingers on Google is
no match for a real physician.

However, by the time I stepped into Rice University I had fallen in love with
physics. I loved it because it established the most fundamental rules of the
universe, rules that existed long before humanity’s arrival and will remain long
after we depart. I was torn between a career in physics and one in medicine, so
I continued to pursue my interest in physics while simultaneously completing the
requirements for medical school. I quickly got involved with a heavy-ion physics
group and began to research with them, exploring the physics of particle
production and the characteristics of the quark-gluon plasma, the state of the
universe at its earliest moments. By the end of my sophomore year, I was set to
work at CERN for a summer and I was excited. It was one of the most impactful
experiences of my life, not only because I worked at the largest particle
accelerator in the world, but also because it helped reveal what I truly wanted
to pursue in my life.

Even though my work at CERN was successful and empowering, the pressures of
academic work quickly occupied my mind. The following semester was the most
rigorous course load I had taken up until then and I became exhausted and burnt
out near the end of the semester. None of my usual activities were able to
revitalize me. Then one small event changed my whole perspective. 

I was on the way to my grandparents’ house for Thanksgiving when I stopped by a
Taco Bell to grab a quick snack before dinner. Consumed by the burdens of my own
world, I almost ignored a homeless man sitting in a booth next to the entrance.
He asked me for some change and I told him I did not have any. I bought some
food and handed him my few coins in change as I walked out the door still
thinking about all of the work I had to do. Then, I decided to look at my
situation from an outside perspective to see if I could see something new.
That's when I realized that I was entirely engrossed in my own world. I was
worrying about academics and work so much that I had ignored someone who had
real world problems.  The man without a roof over his head and barely a jacket
to keep himself warm had almost slipped through my life without a second
thought. I had everything he needed and a whole lot more yet I felt as if I had
nothing. I went back and asked him if he had dinner. He shook his head. Then I
told him to pick whatever he wanted and I would paid for it. We ate together and
I got to know Anthony's life story.

This small event unexpectedly recharged me and I was able to finish off the
semester. I realized that throughout the semester I had tried to remind myself
of my own achievements to try to reenergize me. I had gone to CERN after all and
that must have meant something, but ultimately, the feeling of achieving was
transient for me. The question, “What’s next?” always came to my mind and
feelings of satisfaction of what I had already done were quickly replaced. But,
I found that helping those in need gave me more than just a push, it was a
feeling of renewal that allowed me to continue doing what I needed to do. When I
helped someone it wasn’t about me, it was about them and that was whom I wanted
to focus on. I decided that I should find a career that allowed me to directly
help people.

The following summer I participated in a medical physics internship at MD
Anderson Cancer Center where I saw physics applied in treating patients with
cancer. I observed patient treatments and ultimately shadow a radiation
oncologist. Witnessing the impact of the advances in medicine on the lives of
patients has moved me and convinced me that my previous aspirations of becoming
a physician were really what I wanted to follow. But I also want to contribute
to the advances in medicine that can change lives. I enjoy research and the hunt
to solve new problems. My love for physics is still an integral part of who I am
and I hope to apply my knowledge and unique training in physics to create new
methods of combating illness. Ultimately, I want to become a physician-scientist
who can make key advances to help those who are suffering while at the same time
learn their story.


