I was on a tour of the radiation oncology clinic at MD Anderson Cancer Center
for my medical physics internship. Down the hall I could hear the beeping of
linear accelerators as they ablated tumors with high energy photons at very high
precision. I could see patients exiting treatment rooms after they had received
their radiation. I was surprised. They were laughing and joking with the
technicians and most of them were walking out just fine on their own needing no
assistance at all. If I did not know any better, I would not have suspected that
they were cancer patients. I thought to myself, "This is the power of physics".

I was exploring medical physics at the time because I was seeking to bridge a
gap between two core interests, physics and impacting everyday human lives. In
my four years studying physics, I excitedly learned about the fundamental
phenomena of the universe and it took me abroad to CERN where I contributed to
one of the largest scientific collaborations in the world. But in my third year,
I realized that a career in particle physics research did not excite me. It
seemed very isolated from the world because it was not clear how the direction
of the field would motivate discoveries that would impact our everyday lives.
Medical physics offered a combination that appeared to be a much better fit for
me.

As part of the internship, I was allowed to observe several radiation treatment
procedures, but there was less patient interaction than I had hoped. I requested
to shadow a radiation oncologist, and will never forget the miraculous treatment
outcomes of one of the follow-up patients. 

The physician pulled up the patient's pre-treatment CT scan from eighteen months
ago. He pointed out that the lung cancer had metastasized with lesions up and
down his mediastinum indicated by more than a dozen black spots on the scan. I
suspected that the patient had passed away and he had brought it up as a case
study, but then he surprised me, "Let's go check on him". I followed him to the
exam room not sure what to expect because the chance of recurrence is high for
widely metastasized growths. The patient and his family greeted us with visibly
tense smiles and the physician asked how their lives have been since the last
visit. He pulled up the patient's pre-treatment CT scan and then one from
earlier that day. We all let out a sigh, theirs in relief, mine in awe.  Every
lesion was gone. His scan was clean and clear of the black spots besides a new
one which the physician explained they were continuing to monitor but that it
had not grown in size since the last visit. After we left the room, he explained
to me that the patient was enrolled in an immunotherapy with concomitant
radiation trial. I expressed my amazement and the physician reciprocated. He
assured me that it was not always like that but that case shows the potential. I
was curious about how this treatment worked and so I asked him for literature on
immunotherapy later that day. I was amazed that physics and medicine joined
together had provided such a powerful weapon to save this man's life.

In the following months, I continued to shadow him and observed the array of
interpersonal skills that it takes to be a physician. I was amazed by his
ability to console patients; some crying after receiving news of a suspicious
spot on the CT scan, one fed up with an error of bureaucratic nature and wanting
to switch hospitals. I heard patients tell their stories and talk about the
things that they wanted to do, things that they could do now that they were
cancer free. I realized that I wanted to do more than just make an impact on our
everyday lives. Now, I wanted to be the person directly impacting people's
lives. I wanted to be a physician. 

But I was hesitant to leave behind particle physics research. I enjoyed writing
analysis code to mine large amounts of data. I discussed my hesitation with the
physician. He explained to me that I was actually in a unique position. Medicine
was rapidly evolving with the quick improvements in technology of the recent
decades. He assured me that if I pursued medicine, I could apply my skills in
imaging or bioinformatics research to name a few; possibilities were quickly
opening up in this new age of medicine. Furthermore, the medical community
needed more individuals with technical skills to continue the integration of
medicine with modern technology. I reflected upon the opportunities that lay
ahead of me and all hesitation disappeared.

As a physician, I want to do more than just heal sick patients. Like the
physician I shadowed, I want to know them and give them the chance to live their
life again. I want to explore medicine and apply my abilities to make
discoveries that can impact more than just the relatively few patients that I
will care for in my lifetime. I know I may not be able to save all of my
patients but at least I can give them a fighting chance.
