My family carries our share of illness. Recently, my grandfather passed away
after struggling with Alzheimer's and my uncle suffered from a stroke but
luckily survived and is recovering. We may not be blessed with perfect health
but we are blessed with my uncle, a physician. Throughout my life I have seen
all of my relatives ask for his medical opinion on health issues big or small
and he has always lifted loads of worry off their shoulders. He did not fail to
provide that same support and security when my uncle and grandfather became ill
with advice on how to care for them. His knowledge and dedication in helping our
family has left a strong impression upon me that becoming a physician is the
right choice for me.

This path has not always been my sole desire. While my uncle strongly influenced
me when I was younger, by the time I matriculated to Rice University I had
fallen in love with physics. I was torn between a career in physics and one in
medicine, so I continued to pursue my interest in both. I quickly got involved
in physics research, exploring the physics of particle production and the
characteristics of the quark-gluon plasma, the state of the universe at its
earliest moments. By the end of my sophomore year, I was set to go to
Switzerland to work at CERN for the summer and I was excited. It was the first
time in my life I contributed to something with such an impact on humanity. It
was transformative because it revealed what I truly wanted to pursue in my life.

Even though my work at CERN was successful and empowering, the pressures of
academic work quickly occupied my mind after I returned. The following semester
was the most rigorous course load I had taken up until then and I became
exhausted and burnt out near the end of the semester. None of my usual
activities were able to revitalize me. Then one small event changed my whole
perspective. 

During a visit to my grandparents that semester, I stopped by a Taco Bell to
grab a quick snack. Consumed by the burdens of problem sets and the upcoming
final exams, I almost ignored a homeless man's request for some change. I bought
some food and handed him my few coins in change as I walked out the door still
thinking about all of the work I had to do. I decided to look at my situation
from an outside perspective to see if I could see something new. At that moment,
I realized that I was entirely engrossed in my own world. I was worrying about
academics so much that I had ignored someone who had problems that were much
more fundamental than mine. The man without a roof over his head and barely a
jacket to keep himself warm had almost slipped through my life and I had almost
not given a second thought. I had everything he needed and a whole lot more yet
I had shortsightedly felt I had so little. I went back and asked him if he had
dinner. He shook his head. I told him I would pay for whatever he wanted, just
pick his favorite. We shook hands and introduced ourselves; his name was
Anthony and he was born and raised in Corpus Christi but had come to Houston to
care for his dying sister many years back. We ate together and I got
to know his life story.

This small event unexpectedly recharged me and I was able to finish off the
semester. I realized that throughout the semester I had tried to remind myself
of my own achievements to try to reenergize me. I had gone to CERN after all and
that must have meant something, but ultimately, the feeling of achievement was
transient to me leaving not much behind. But, I found that helping those in need
gave me more than just a push, it was a feeling of renewal that allowed me to
continue doing what I needed to do. I realized whenever I helped someone through
tutoring physics or buying dinner it was not about me, it was about them. I
decided that I did not want to be in a situation where I focused on myself and
that my career should be one where I have a direct hand in helping people and
focusing on their worries. I decided I wanted to be a physician.

The following summer I participated in a medical physics internship at the MD
Anderson Cancer Center where I saw physics applied to treating patients with
cancer. I observed patient treatments and ultimately shadowed a radiation
oncologist. Witnessing the impact of the advances in medicine on the lives of
patients has moved me and convinced me that my previous aspirations of becoming
a physician were really what I wanted to follow. But I also want to contribute
to the advances in medicine to improve everyone's lives. I enjoy research and
the hunt to solve new problems. Furthermore, my love for physics and mathematics
along with the technical skills that I have developed in research, allow me to
uniquely contribute to medicine in this new era of rapidly advancing technology.
I want to become a physician-scientist to make the key advances to help everyone
who is ill or will become ill, but I also want to learn their stories and build
a relationship with those I help.
