Down the hall I heard the beeping of linear accelerators as physicians ablated
tumors using high-energy photons with pinpoint precision. I witnessed the power
of physics in medicine as cancer patients, just finishing their first treatment,
remarked on the painlessness of the procedure. I could not help but smile
knowing that physics had given them an option they could be optimistic about.

I interned at MD Anderson Cancer Center in medical physics because I was seeking
to bridge a gap between my two passions-- physics and impacting everyday human
lives. During my study of physics, I fervently learned about the phenomena of
the universe, from the motion of protons in an electric field, to the quantum
dynamics of its spin, and eventually leading to the principles of the MRI. My
journey in physics even brought me to the Large Hadron Collider, the particle
accelerator used to discover the Higgs boson, where I helped design the online
monitoring system used during collisions. While in-depth experiences in physics
have shown me its power, I was curious to explore its integration with
healthcare and see its impact on the lives of those who are ill. Throughout my
medical physics internship, I observed radiation treatment procedures alongside
the medical physicists, and the marvelous potential of physics combined with
modern medicine. However, during most of the treatment, the patient was isolated
in the radiation room restricting all patient interactions to the several
minutes spent prepping for treatment. I discovered strong desires to experience
more interactions with patients and observe the long-term role physicians have
in the patient's therapy, from consultation sessions to post-treatment
follow-up. These desires led to my shadowing experience with Dr. Steven Lin, MD,
Ph.D., a radiation oncologist. While having great experiences with Dr. Lin, I
will never forget the miraculous recovery of a patient he treated that
highlighted the power of medicine.

Dr. Lin enlarged the patient's 18-month-old FDG scan on the screen. Over a dozen
FDG avid lesions peppered the mediastinum, indicating aggressively metastasized
lung cancer. My heart sank as I wondered how long ago the patient must have
passed away-- but before I could ask, Dr. Lin stood up and said, "Let's go check
on him." The patient and his family were waiting to review the follow-up scan;
they greeted us with visibly tense smiles and nervous handshakes. Dr. Lin's
jovial personality began to ease them and melt the visible tension on their
faces. Then, he pulled up an FDG scan with today's date, and we all let out a
sigh-- theirs in relief, mine in awe. Every lesion was gone. Their eyes
glistened with tears as they thanked Dr. Lin for returning a sense of normalcy
to their lives. Afterwards, he explained to me that the results were due to a
new trial protocol in which immunotherapy is administered with concurrent
radiation therapy. In curiosity, I asked him for literature on this combined
treatment method. As I read the papers, I was impressed by the potential of this
synergistic use of radiation therapy in medicine-- it had saved the patient from
certain death.

I continued to shadow Dr. Lin and observed his impeccable bedside manners. One
of his patients was particularly irate; with fists clenched, he threatened to
change hospitals due to numerous miscommunications with staff about his
treatment schedule. Dr. Lin acknowledged the patient's frustration and
compassionately explained why he could provide the best treatment for him.
Within ten minutes, the patient thanked Dr. Lin for convincing him to stay. I
was astonished by his ability to console patients; he made tears disappear and
frustrations fizzle. Listening to patients talk about their struggles with
cancer-- and witnessing their triumphs over them-- moved me. I want to be the
one to fight alongside them and convince them that everything will be fine. I
want to impact the lives of patients by giving them assurance and the ability to
fight illness in their greatest time of need.

If I were a physician, I would do more than heal sick patients. With my research
experience and background in physics and math, I wish to expand the methods of
cancer treatment. For instance, despite the efficacy of radiation therapy, it
has limitations. The danger of high radiation doses to critical structures, such
as the spine or heart, restrict its usage leading to cases in which cancer
recurrence near these structures cannot be treated multiple times with this
method. By applying the skills I gained from my research in particle physics, I
can improve imaging to detect cancer earlier or discover safer methods to fight
cancer allowing me to impact the lives of more than just my patients. Certainly,
I cannot save every patient, but at least I can give all of them an optimistic
fighting chance.
