Down the hall I could hear the beeping of linear accelerators as they delivered
radiation to cancer patients. They were ablating tumors with high energy photons
with very high precision, a testament to how far technology has come. I was
getting a tour of the radiation oncology clinic at MD Anderson Cancer Center
where I was just starting my medical physics internship. As we moved down the
hall, I could see patients exiting treatment rooms after they had received their
radiation. I was surprised. They were laughing and joking with the technicians
and most of them were walking out just fine on their own needing no assistance
at all. If I did not know any better, I would not have suspected that they were
cancer patients. I thought to myself, "This is the power of physics".

I was exploring medical physics at the time because I was seeking to bridge a
gap between two core interests, physics and impacting everyday human lives. In
my four years studying physics, I excitedly learned about the fundamental
phenomena of the universe from which I could understand complex systems such as
the quantum mechanics of MRI scanners. It also took me abroad to CERN where I
could contribute to one of the largest scientific collaborations in the world.
But despite all of this, in my third year I realized that a career in particle
physics research did not excite me. It seemed very isolated from the world
because it was not clear how the direction of the field would motivate
discoveries that would impact our everyday lives. Medical physics appeared to be
a much better fit for me and worth learning about.

As part of the internship, I was allowed to observe several radiation treatment
procedures. I realized that medical physicists were not required to have much
interaction with the patients, but I wanted to get the know the people who we
were treating, so I requested to shadow a radiation oncologist. As I shadowed
him, most cases were typical follow-ups or check-ups to evaluate treatment
progress, but I will never forget the miraculous recovery of one of the
follow-up patients. 

The physician pulled up the patient's pre-treatment CT scan from eighteen months
ago. He pointed out that the lung cancer had metastasized with lesions up and
down his mediastinum indicated by more than a dozen black spots on the scan. I
suspected that he had brought it up as a past case study, but then he surprised
me, "Let's go check on him". I followed him to the exam room not sure what to
expect because I knew with cancer that severe the chance of recurrence is high.
We stepped into the room and his family was waiting with him. They greeted us
with visibly tense smiles. The physician told some jokes and I could sense the
worry that cut their laughter short. He asked about their lives, what the
children were up to, just catching up. Finally, he arrived at the reason they
were all here. He gathered us around the exam room computer and pulled up the
patient's pre-treatment CT scan and then one from earlier that day. We all let
out a sigh, theirs in relief, mine in awe. Every lesion was gone. His scan was
clean and clear of the black spots besides a new one which the physician
explained they were continuing to monitor but that it had not grown in size
since the last visit. They thanked him with glowing smiles and unburdened
laughter. After we left the room, he explained to me that the patient was part
of a trial where immunotherapy was administered with concomitant radiation
therapy. I expressed my amazement and the physician reciprocated. He assured me
that it was not always like that but that case shows the potential. I asked him
for literature on immunotherapy later that day still amazed that physics and
medicine joined together had caused such a drastic change in the patient's life.

In the following months, I continued to shadow him observing all of the skills,
beyond just vast knowledge, that it takes to be a physician. I was amazed by the
array of interpersonal skills that he mustered to console patients; some crying
after receiving news of a suspicious spot on the CT scan, one angry about
backlogged procedures and miscommunication from hospital staff due to an error
of bureaucratic nature. I heard patients tell their stories and all of the
things that they wanted to do. He received so much thanks for giving their lives
back and each time I was moved by the role he played. I realized that just
wanting to make an impact on our everyday lives was a vague dream of mine. What
I really wanted now was to be the person actively impacting people's everyday
life. I wanted to do what physicians do on a daily basis.

To me, being a physician is not just about healing sick patients; it is about
giving back their lives to them and their family, their friends, and everyone
who cares for them. It is about getting to know my patients' dreams and wishes
and the life that they want after they get better because I want them to live it
all out. I want them to know that I will be fighting for them no matter how good
or bad the prognosis. As a physician, I also want to use my unique skill set to
contribute to the field of medicine in research and make discoveries that will
impact more than just the relatively few people that I can care for in my
lifetime. I know I may not be able to save all of my patients but at least I can
give them a fighting chance.

But I was hesitant to leave behind the life of particle physics research. It was
fun, and I loved solving complex problems and writing analysis code. I arranged
to talk with the physician after his rounds to discuss my hesitation. He
explained to me that I was actually in a unique position. Medicine was rapidly
evolving with the quick improvements in technology of the recent decades. He
assured me that if I pursue medicine, I could apply my skills in imaging or
bioinformatics research to name a few; the possibilities were quickly opening up
in this new age of medicine. Furthermore, the medical community needed more
individuals with technical skills to continue the marriage of modern technology
and medicine. I saw the opportunities that lay ahead of me and my hesitation
disappeared.

===========================================================================

Then, while we were setting up an elderly patient for her first treatment she
began to have second thoughts. She was scared about the radiation and I could
understand her fear, after all when you hear about radiation its almost never a
good thing. After a few minutes of frustratingly insisting on the dangers of
radiation, the patient demanded to speak to her radiation oncologist. Within a
few minutes the physician was there to talk to her. He made her laugh with some
inside jokes that they had, and her whole demeanor changed within a minute. He
explained to her how much she needed this and how he wanted her to continue
living so that she can see her children and her grandchildren for years to come.
Finally, he asked her if she wanted to continue. She agreed with a heartwarming
smile, lied down on the treatment table, and said thanked her physician. I was
amazed by their relationship. She put her life in his hands and completely
trusted him and only him with it and he was able to calm her down because he
knows her story.


It was not long until I faced another tragedy. My grandfather was diagnosed with
Alzheimer's in my first year at university, but it had already advanced for
sometime beforehand. He began to forget who I was even though he cared for me
every summer during my childhood while my parents worked. Eventually, when I
would visit, he smiled as if he knew me well but I could tell that he was
struggling to remember who I was. However, we were blessed with my uncle, a
physician. He knew how to take care of him especially towards the end when he
noticed grandfather's difficulty breathing and coughing and suspected pneumonia.
I could feel how much suffering my uncle lifted off our shoulders as he answered
our questions and gave us care advice allowing my grandfather to live his last
few years comfortably at home. I do not know what my grandfather's last thoughts
were, but I am sure he was as close to peace as he could be in a familiar room,
in the company of familiar faces. I thanked my uncle endlessly for all that he
had done for everyone, but I also thanked him for showing me the impact a great
physician can have on the life of the patient; on the many lives that surround
the patient.

Witnessing my uncle's role in my grandfather's care fundamentally changed what I
wanted in my future career. While I enjoyed research in particle physics, the
prospects of a career in pure physics research was no longer enough for me.
Combined with my appreciation for people's lives and my love for physics,

I began to observe a radiation oncologist, and I quickly realized medicine was
the path for me. For each checkup, I could see the tension on the faces of the
patient and family. I could sense the worry behind their smiles and laughter as
the physician worked to put them at ease. Their fear reminded me of the fear my
family and I felt when my grandfather would have breathing complications or
would cough uncontrollably for hours. But the physician melted their worries by
answering questions, explaining the treatment process, or giving care advice;
just like my uncle had done for our family. Sometimes the physician did not have
good news to deliver but even in those moments he gave the patient the power and
assurance that he would be fighting alongside them. In the months that I
observed him, I had never experienced so much joy in my life as I thought about
the time that he gave back to patients who could now live their lives pursuing a
future. 

To me, being a physician is not just about healing sick patients; it is about
giving back their life to them and their family, their friends, and everyone who
cares for them. It is about getting to know my patients' dreams and wishes and
the life that they want after they get better because I want them to live it all
out. As a physician, I want to bring peace to terrified patients and families
just like my uncle and the physician I observed. I want them to know that I will
be fighting for them no matter how good or bad the prognosis. I may not be able
to save all of my patients because at times life is more bitter than sweet...
but at least I can get a say in the matter.
