- Extensive research experience with Professor Wei Li in heavy-ion physics
  including
    - 3 years experience during undergraduate
    - Summer research internship at CERN
    - Employed as full-time research assistant for one year post undergraduate with an aim to publish soon
    - Poster presentation at undergraduate natural sciences symposium

- Summer internship in medical physics at MD Anderson Cancer Center

- Teaching assistant for biological laboratory techniques course

Prompt: Describe the setting in which you envision conducting your medical
career. Also include how and why you think this setting would help fulfill your
interests related to the practice of medicine.


I kept my eyes on the patient as she listened to the radiation oncologist
explain to her that there were no other options. Her body could not safely
tolerate more radiation and she was not healthy enough for surgery or drug
therapy. I wondered what it must be like for her and as I imagined myself in her
position, I wished that there was another option for her-- something that could be
done to let her live.

I was shadowing the physician at the time and I met many patients who owed their
lives to the latest advances in medicine. However, this case reminded me that
there is still a dire need to continue development of treatment techniques and
make new discoveries. When I envision my potential future career as a physician,
I imagine myself as a radiation oncologist and also as a researcher. I hope to
bring my background in physics and mathematics into the medical field to improve
cancer treatment through improvment of different methods such as imaging or
radiation therapy. To this end, I see myself working at a top cancer research
center that provides a conducive environment for performing research by offering
numerous resources as well as close vicinity to top researchers in a variety of
fields. This will allow me to explore new ideas and be directly connected to the
latest advances in medical research, which will ultimately assist me in my own
work.

I also intend to equally split my time between research and providing cancer
treatment for patients. Throughout my shadowing experience, I have discovered
that patient interactions form the foundation for my desire to pursue medicine
and also fuels my desire to perform research. Both success or failure of
treatment provides insight and inspiration for my research aspirations.
Therefore, the institution that I work for would ideally be able to provide the
best treatment options for patients as well.

Lastly, I have specifically envisioned myself working at MD Anderson Cancer
Center, which I believe fulfills many of my current career goals. I have
researched in their radiation physics department and shadowed Dr. Steven Lin
M.D., Ph.D., a radiation oncologist at the center. Through these experiences, I
have realized it provides a good balance of what I search for in both research
and clinical work. Additionally, it is located in Houston, which is close to my
hometown and the city of my alma mater. Working there would allow me to serve
the community to which I owe all of my success.




Through my discussions with him about the
balance between research and clinical work, I have realized that MD Anderson
provides the environment that suits my future career goals of having an equal
balance between research work and caring for patients.

I was glad that she had found some peace in light of the situation, but I wished
that more could be done. As I reflected on the encounter it became evident that
research offered a way. 

Yet-- despite losing option after option, her expression was placid,
her brow remained unfurrowed, and she looked as calm as when we initially
entered the examination room. Her daughters began to cry as they attempted to
console her, and only then did her expression change into a comforting smile as
she said, "It's okay. I lived a long life."


 choice of setting for my medical career is dependent upon my specific
interests in medicine as well as personal reasons. I have a strong intention to
return to Texas to conduct my medical career, specifically the Texas Medical
Center. The close vicinity of my undergraduate institution, Rice University, to
the Texas Medical Center has provided me several opportunities to explore why it
is a good fit for my interests.

I believe the Texas medical center is conducive for my interests in academic research
in cancer and teaching while also allowing me to provide state-of-the-art
treatment options for cancer patients.

I have never experienced the impact of cancer. 
