My research experience began my freshman year at Rice University with Assistant
Professor Wei Li, Ph.D. in the Department of Physics and Astronomy's Nuclear and
Particle Physics division. Professor Li's research group studies the correlation
of particles produced in heavy-ion collisions at the Large Hadron Collider. The
analysis of particle correlations allows one to measure properties of the
quark-gluon plasma (QGP), the supposed state of the universe shortly after the
Big Bang.

My first major project with Professor Li was in the summer following my freshman
year. I performed an independent analysis of the distribution of charged
particles produced in proton-lead collisions. The objective was to utilize the
statistical method of Bayesian unfolding to remove, or deconvolve, detector
distortions and background from observed data. In this experience, I learned to
use ROOT, the main data analysis framework used by the particle physics
community, C-plus-plus, and began to accumulate skills in computational data
analysis methods used in particle physics.

The summer after my sophomore year, I received a grant from the Shell Foundation
to work with the European Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN) at the Large
Hadron Collider (LHC) in Meyrin, Switzerland on a detector project for ten
weeks. I was tasked with developing the software for the channel monitoring
system, a component of the overall monitoring system, for a new subdetector
addition to the Compact Muon Solenoid (CMS) experiment as well as performing
tracker algorithm efficiency studies for Professor Li's research group.
Throughout this experience, I expanded my programming skills in several
languages including C-plus-plus and python. I also developed my leadership and
teamwork skills through the undertaking of large responsibilities. For instance,
my channel monitoring system is in use at all times during LHC operation, making
it a vital asset to the monitoring team. Also, as the main developer for the
system, I called meetings with members of the monitoring team to discuss feature
developments for the system and presented reports to the subdetector commission
committee.

Upon my return from CERN, I worked on an analysis project to measure the
elliptic flow of a particle called the Xi baryon in proton-lead collisions. The
goal was to test a model of the QGP, which assumed hydrodynamic behavior. If the
hydrodynamic assumption were correct, then the elliptic flow of different
particle species would exhibit an inverse relationship with their mass. I
planned to compare the elliptic flow of the Xi baryon to that of two other
particle species, the Kaon and Lambda, which had been previously measured. Since
the elliptic flow of the Xi had not been measured before, I was required to
build up the analysis from scratch. I developed the foundations of this analysis
throughout my junior year writing the analysis code for the selection of Xi
baryons from collision data.

The summer following my junior year, I decided to temporarily suspend my work
with Professor Li to explore medical physics through an internship with MD
Anderson Cancer Center. I was interested in the application of physics to
healthcare and was curious to see how my skills from particle physics research
could translate to the field of medicine. I worked with Professor Song Gao,
Ph.D. on the qualification of a 2D ionization chamber array (ICA) for beam
quality assurance of linear accelerators used to deliver radiation therapy. The
2D ICA provided a fast method to measure beam profiles and radiation dose.
Therefore, it was intended to replace the quality assurance scanner in use at
the time, which required a tedious setup procedure. I applied my programming
skills from particle physics research to write batch scripts to
extract the data from the data collection software and analyze them in Excel. We
found that the 2D ionization chamber performs on par with the previous scanner
and qualifies as an appropriate replacement. The analysis is currently being
written into a publication.

In my senior year, I resumed my work with Professor Li on the Xi analysis
project. I demonstrated that there is an inverse relationship between the
elliptic flow of the Xi, Kaon, and Lambda particles with their mass as expected
by the hydrodynamic assumption. I presented a poster of my work at the Rice
Undergraduate Natural Sciences Symposium. In addition, I wrote my work into an
undergraduate thesis, successfully defended it, and received the Claude W. Heaps
Prize from the Department of Physics and Astronomy for my work.

Professor Li has since hired me as a full-time researcher for the next year.
During this time, I will expand my thesis work to include the elliptic flow
measurement of the Omega baryon providing a complete analysis that I will
publish. There are also tentative plans for my return to CERN where I will
assist in the redevelopment of the CMS Web Based Monitoring system from January
to June of 2018.
