Physics has become a part of my identity. My friends and family know me best for
my interest in physics because I frequently pose questions about physical
phenomena and then tease out the process behind it. But in my study of physics,
I have learned much more than just the laws of nature. I have obtained skills
that are also highly useful in medicine.

An important skill that is taught in physics is how to make sound assumptions
based on initial conditions of an open-ended problem. Generating sound
assumptions is important because it establishes a base from which further
assumptions and implications can be made, which will ultimately lead to a
framework with a final conclusion and supported by the evidence. This skill is
important in diagnosis where a physician must draw a conclusion from a list of
symptoms, medical history, and, in some situations, imaging scans. For example,
a physician may simplify the problem by first determining which symptoms are
likely to be a result of other symptoms the patient has, and then focusing on
the symptoms that appear likely to be a result of the underlying illness and
then identify that illness. This must be done while keeping the patient history
and other supplemental information in mind to support the assumptions made
throughout the reasoning process. Evidently, medicine requires large scale
mental data management to arrive at correct conclusions, a skill that I have
honed for the last four years.

Physics has also taught me to apply interdisciplinary knowledge, another
cornerstone of effective healthcare. The human body is complex and this is
reflected in the many specialties within medicine. Since the body works together
as a whole, physicians cannot be solely focused on their own specialty and must
be able to apply knowledge that they have in other specialties to assist them in
an accurate diagnosis. Also, physicians who have this skill are more likely to
develop new techniques or incorporate techniques from other areas in an
unconventional manner to improve healthcare, take for instance the inventors of
the MRI.

Physics has fostered my critical thinking skills to solve complex problems by
finding base assumptions and then building upon them to a conclusion and has
also practiced my ability to incorporate information from multiple disciplines
in solving these problems. These skills are used daily by physicians in all
specialties and boost their efficacy in providing and revolutionizing
healthcare.
