Student body diversity is one of the strongest contributors in producing a
unique educational experience. My experiences and skills offer unique potential
to supplement the development of my classmates into effective physicians.
Intellectual curiosity, organizational and teamwork skills, and my background in
physics and mathematics are qualities that will extend the educational
experience of my peers.

New research continuously improves our knowledge of treating illness. My
intellectual curiosity will assist me in keeping up to date with the literature
and in contributing to it throughout my career. Research opportunities in
several fields of medicine are expanding commensurately with the rapid
developments in modern technology. Advances in processors and cheaper data
storage boost the quantity of information available for clinical research as
well as open doors for the fields of bioinformatics, imaging, and personalized
medicine through the use of machine learning. These trends will benefit from a
new generation of researchers whom possess the technical skills to mine the data
and create innovative algorithms. My technical training through particle physics
research and background in mathematics allows me to explore this growing
frontier in medicine and provide a means for my peers to learn about it.

Collaboration between different professions is crucial in quality and effective
healthcare, therefore teamwork and communication skills are essential for
medical students who will depend upon each other to work effectively as a team.
My participation in the development of the channel monitoring subsystem for the
CMS detector was my largest collaborative project. As the contact, it was my
responsibility to communicate with the monitoring team to determine what
information to display. I also required the foresight to independently develop
features that would be useful for them. Furthermore, I worked remotely to finish
the subsystem shortly after my return to the States. This experience has honed
my ability to communicate and collaborate with others as a team to achieve a
complex goal. It also displays both my commitment to my work and ability to
handle large responsibilities making me a valuable asset my peers can rely on.

These are some of the unique perspectives I can bring to the table for my peers.
I believe that my experiences have matured necessary and vital skills as a
future physician.

In my experience, courses provide the foundation for understanding the core
principles of the research of my peers allowing us to educate one another about
the current developments in different branches of our fields. As a medical
student and a future physician, I will be able to enrich my colleagues in this
way. 

